Update EIP-7701: Replace ABI-encoded transaction input with two new opcodes (#9576)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-7701.md

Transactions of this type are referred to as "AA transactions".

### Definitions

* **Smart Contract Account**: an Ethereum smart contract that serves as the user's account and on-chain identity.
  It is responsible for holding user's assets, verifying user requests, and executing actions on the user's behalf.
* **Sender**: the Smart Contract Account sending the current AA transaction.
* **Paymaster**: a smart contract that is requested to pay gas fees for the current AA transaction on behalf of the `Sender` contract.
* **Factory**: a smart contract that performs a deployment for a new `Sender` contract if necessary in the context of the current AA transaction.
* **Transaction Validity**:
  A property of an Ethereum transaction that describes whether this transaction can be included in a block without a violation of the ethereum execution and consensus rules.
  This property depends on both the inputs of the transaction and the current state of the Ethereum blockchain and can change over time.
* **EIP-7701 Transaction**: the entire transaction initiated by the `Sender` Smart Contract Account and represented with

>   an [EIP-2718](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2718) compatible Transaction Envelope object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  an [EIP-2718] compatible Transaction Envelope object.
```

> * **EIP-7701 Call Frame**:

Reviewer 2: There is a definition right below

validations as part of EOF code validation.
The description of specific flags and their impact on EOF validation shall be added as a separate EIP.

> ### New opcodes `AATXPARAM` and `AATXPARAMDATACOPY`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### New opcodes `TXPARAMSIZE` and `TXPARAMCOPY`
```

Accessing transaction details within call frames is performed using the new `AATXPARAM` opcode.
The instructions are followed by an 8-bit immediate value, which we call `n`, and can have a value of 0 to 255.

> The `AATXPARAM` opcode pushes onto the stack the transaction parameter value defined by the input `n`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `TXPARAMSIZE` opcode pushes onto the stack the size of transaction parameter `n`.
```

The `AATXPARAMDATACOPY` opcode copies data from the appropriate dynamically sized transaction parameter to memory.
It takes 3 stack arguments:
* `destOffset`: byte offset in the memory where the result will be copied.
* `offset`: byte offset in the calldata to copy.
* `size`: byte size to copy.

The valid values for `n` are described in the table below.

| `n` | Return value                |
|-----|-----------------------------|
| 0   | `sender`                    |

> | 1   | `senderValidationData` size |

Reviewer: its a bad idea to have meta-parameter for size.

validations as part of EOF code validation.
The description of specific flags and their impact on EOF validation shall be added as a separate EIP.

### New opcodes: `TXPARAMDATALOAD`, `TXPARAMDATASIZE`, `TXPARAMDATACOPY` and `TXPARAM`

Accessing transaction details within call frames is performed using the new `TXPARAM*` opcode family.
The instructions are followed by an 8-bit immediate value, which we call `n`, and can have a value of 0 to 255.

The `TXPARAM` opcode pushes onto the stack the transaction parameter value defined by the input `n`.

The `TXPARAMDATALOAD`, `TXPARAMDATASIZE`, `TXPARAMDATACOPY` follow the pattern of `CALLDATA*` / `RETURNDATA*` opcode families.

1. `TXPARAMDATASIZE` opcode puts the byte size of the specified transaction parameter.
2.`TXPARAMDATALOAD` opcode takes the byte offset in the specified transaction parameter from stack and puts the 32-byte value starting from the given offset of the specified transaction parameter to stack.
3.`TXPARAMDATACOPY` opcode copies data from the appropriate dynamically sized transaction parameter to memory.

> It takes 3 stack arguments:

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't it be 4?  The first one needs to be the param number.

The `TXPARAMDLOAD`, `TXPARAMSIZE`, `TXPARAMCOPY` follow the pattern of `CALLDATA*` / `RETURNDATA*` opcode
families.

1. `TXPARAMSIZE` opcode puts the byte size of the transaction parameter value defined by the input `n`.
2. `TXPARAMLOAD` opcode takes the byte offset in the specified transaction parameter from stack and puts the
   32-byte value starting from the given offset of the specified transaction parameter to stack.\
   It takes 1 stack arguments:
   * `offset`: byte offset in the transaction parameter to copy.
3. `TXPARAMCOPY` opcode copies data from the appropriate dynamically sized transaction parameter to memory.\
   It takes 3 stack arguments:
   * `destOffset`: byte offset in the memory where the result will be copied.
   * `offset`: byte offset in the transaction parameter to copy.
   * `size`: byte size to copy.

The valid values for `n` are described in the table below.

| `n`  | Return value                  | Data size |
|------|-------------------------------|-----------|
| 0x00 | current transaction type      | 32        |
| 0x01 | current role                  | 32        |

> | 0x02 | `sender`                      | 20        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 0x02 | `sender`                      | 32        |
```

| 0x03 | `senderValidationData`        | dynamic   |

> | 0x04 | `deployer`                    | 0 or 20   |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 0x04 | `deployer`                    | 0 or 32   |
```

| 0x05 | `deployerData`                | dynamic   |

> | 0x06 | `paymaster`                   | 0 or 20   |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 0x06 | `paymaster`                   | 0 or 32   |
```

| `CALLDATA*` | `msg.data`          | The transaction data is set to inputs of the corresponding frame              |

### Transaction execution context

Note that some behaviours in the EVM depend on the transaction context. These behaviours are:

1. Costs of the `SSTORE (0x55)` opcode per [EIP-2200](./eip-2200)
2. Costs of accessing cold addresses and slots per [EIP-2929](./eip-2929)
3. Values available within the transient storage per [EIP-1163](./eip-1163)
4. Maximum amount of gas refund assigned after the execution per [EIP-3529](./eip-3529)

These features are not affected by the separation of the transaction into multiple frames.
Meaning, for example, that a value set with `TSTORE (0x5D)` in one frame will remain available in the next one.

### Flow diagrams

#### Simple AA Transaction flow

![Simple AA transaction flow diagram](../assets/eip-7701/simple_flow.svg)

#### Complete AA transaction flow

![Simple AA transaction flow diagram](../assets/eip-7701/complete_flow.svg)

### Pseudocode

#### AA transaction state transition function

```python

def state_transition_function(tx):
    buy_gas(tx)

>     deployer_result = deployer_frame(tx)

Reviewer 2: Please add checks for deployer frame and paymaster frame since they're optional, and it's not obvious

Author: I did this by returning `{success: True}` inside the `deployer_frame` function, to keep the `state_transition_function` as clean as possible.
